Repository for the experiments described in "Global and local comparison of SHAP and LIME across different accuracies" for the Bachelor End Project.

## 📜 Overview

- [🔎 Paper Details]()
    - [♻️ Reproduction]()
    - [🚀 Dependencies]()
    - [🌱 Resources]()
- [⭐ Experimental manipulation]()


## 🔎 Paper Details

Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) methods are increasingly used to bridge the gap between complex models and human understanding. Among the most widely used post-hoc explanation models
are SHapley Additive eXplanations (SHAP) and Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME). However, these explanation techniques are based on distinct theoretical framework, which
could have an effect on the agreement of the feature importance rankings. Moreover, the influence of the accuracy of ’black-box’ AI models is not well explored. Therefore, the primary objective of this project is to advance the understanding of how varying levels of accuracies affect the agreement of SHAP and LIME on a local and global level for Random Forest model trained on tabular dataset.
Feature importance rankings were generated by SHAP and LIME for the overall model explanation, as well as for each instance. The rankings were compared globally through Spearman’s correlation and
Kendall Tau Rank correlation, while the rankings locally were compared using Spearman’s correlation and Rank-Bias Overlap. The analysis shows that SHAP and LIME produce largely similar feature
importance rankings on a global level, and that there is an overall negative relation between accuracy and agreement. On a local level, the post-hoc models differ substantially and have a slight positive correlation between accuracy and agreement.

### ♻️ Reproduction

To reproduce the global results simply run `Global.py`.  For the local results simply run `Local.py`.

> \* The code was tested with Python 3.13.3 on Windows.

### 🚀 Dependencies

The code was tested using these libraries and versions:

```

lime==0.2.0.1
matplotlib==3.11.0
numpy==2.4.6
pandas==3.0.3
scikit-learn==1.9.0
scipy==1.17.1
shap==0.52.0


```

### 🌱 Resources

Running `Global.py` or `Local.py` on the Graphic card AMD Radeon RX 7800 XT with the processor AMD Ryzen 5 7600 takes approximately 80 minutes.

## ⭐ Experimental manipulation

> `Dataloader.py` -- line 7
Update the file path:
```python
    data_fraud = pd.read_csv(r'data/fraud.csv')
```

> `On_Repeat.py` -- lines 15
Modify the Random Forest parameters:
```python
    return RandomForestClassifier(random_state=random_state, criterion="entropy", n_estimators=10, max_depth=20)
```

> `Global.py` -- lines 188-194
Modify the dataframe, target column name, noise percentage, random state and number of repeats.
```python
    dataset_configs = [
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0, 1, 100),
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0.1, 1, 100),
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0.2, 1, 100),
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0.3, 1, 100),
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0.4, 1, 100),
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0.5, 1, 100)]
```

> `Local.py` -- lines 37
Modify the Rank-Based Overlap persistence parameter and ranking depth.
```python
def rbo_score(list1, list2, p=0.9, k=5):
```

> `Local.py` -- lines 266-272
Modify the dataframe, target column name, noise percentage, random state and number of repeats.
```python
    dataset_configs = [
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0, 1, 100),
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0.1, 1, 100),
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0.2, 1, 100),
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0.3, 1, 100),
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0.4, 1, 100),
        (dl.data_fraud, 'is_fraud', 0.5, 1, 100)]
```
